---
layout: post
title: Reflection Blog Post : State Sentencing Project
---

# Blog Post: Reflection on the State Sentencing Project

(This reflection was written by Christine and me together).

- Overall, what did you achieve in your project?
  - Over the course of the quarter, we were able to develop 2 main Scrapy projects. The first project was able to systematically parse through cases and scrape about 2,400,000 relevant cases from the Virginia Online Case Information System. The second project used the Wayback Machine to gather the judges serving in the 120 (+1 that no longer exists) circuit courts going back to the early 2000s. With the tools included in pandas, we then merged these two datasets to create a database containing court records dating back thirty years. Each case in the database includes case type and charge class, a description of the crime, the sentence, the defendant's race and gender, and for about 70% of the cases, the name of the sentencing judge.
- What are two aspects of your project that you are especially proud of?

  - One aspect that we're particularly proud of is being able to get all the possible cases using the scraper. This is because we faced some issues with this early on, such as only being able to get the results by searching names, the portal having a minimum search criterion, getting too many case results etc. Something else that we're proud of is figuring out how to use API calls and the network panel on the browser to scrape the portal (which was a dynamically loaded website) because we didn't cover this kind of scraping in class.

- What are two things you would suggest doing to further improve your project? (You are not responsible for doing those things.)
  - While the database is freely available for download on Github, we could also start building some type of web portal in the future to make the information more widely accessible, especially for people unfamiliar with SQL (or pandas). The driving purpose of this project was to create a resource for research into potential biases within state-level sentencing in the United States. Now that the data is compiled, we could then do some data analysis with the information to find trends in Virginia's system.
- How does what you achieved compare to what you set out to do in your proposal? (if you didn't complete everything in your proposal, that's fine!)
  - In general, we accomplished most of the goals outlined in the proposal. Of the 121 circuit courts, we completed scraping cases for 115, had partial cases for 4 (still running as of June 8th at 9PM), and missed 2 that did not use the online case system. However, we didn't gather demographic information on the judges because we were unable to find this information online without manually Googling each judge.
- What are three things you learned from the experience of completing your project? Data analysis techniques? Python packages? Git + GitHub? Etc?
  - The main skill from this project was better understanding of Scrapy to gather dynamically generated data. We used web browser developer tools to look at network requests and responses generated by the API behind the case website, then imitated them directly with Scrapy to avoid dealing with JavaScript events. As a team, we got more comfortable with using Github to collaborate on different files and the project as a whole. Finally, it's not a huge skill but we both were introduced to the functionality of the terminal and learned some basic commands as we worked with the server running our spiders.
- How will your experience completing this project will help you in your future studies or career? Please be as specific as possible.

  - I am glad to have learned how to scrape different kinds of data because I'd definitely like to use this skill in future projects. So far, I had mainly worked on data analysis and so, this project has helped me consider careers/projects that might be related to actually getting the data as well. It's also taught me how to deal with real data, which has so many typos, inconsistencies, and doesn't always lead to perfect trends. I've always heard about how it's important to know this in the "real world".  
